New guide for making addon (#907)
oam-dev/kubevela.io: docs/platform-engineers/addon/intro.md

title: Build Your Own Addon
---

A KubeVela addon is a collection that can contain the following two types of files；
* `Extension configuration file` that defines KubeVela extensibility points, such as [X-definitions](../../getting-started/definition), [UI-Schema](../../reference/ui-schema) or [topology-rules](../../reference/topology-rule).

> * `Resource description file` that defines Kubernetes resource objects. They may be the kubernetes operator behind a X-definition, or the webserver, etc.

Reviewer: kubernetes -> Kubernetes

The picture below shows what KubeVela does when an addon is enabled. There are mainly three process:

> * [Addon Registry](./addon-registry) store addons which can be used to share and distribute addons anywhere, it can be any git repo, helm repo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Addon Registry](./addon-registry) store addons which can be used to share and distribute addons anywhere, it can be any git or helm chart repository.
```

* When an addon is enabled through UX/CLI, it will pull these resource files from the Addon Registry, render them and create a KubeVela application.
* Finally, the KubeVela controller take care the rest things and deliver the addon as a normal application into control plane or multi-clusters.

![alt](../../resources/addon-mechanism.jpg)

> ## Make an addon

Reviewer 2: 为什么是 Make 而不是 Build？

Author: 改成 make 一是表达“制作”的意义，二是避免 build 给开发者带来似乎是在构建一个二进制的错觉

Reviewer 2: 那你得整体改啊，这半吊子。。

There're no restrict rules for an [experimental addon](https://github.com/kubevela/catalog/tree/master/experimental/addons), but if the addon want to be [verified](https://github.com/kubevela/catalog/tree/master/addons), the README is the most important thing.

### template file (Optional)

> Through the above introduction, we know that a very important part of an addon is resource description file that define the Kubernetes resource objects that needs to be installed. You can write the `template file` (template.yaml or template.cue) or files below `resources/` dir to define these resources. These resources will be rendered into a KubeVela application, which applied to each cluster by the KubeVela controller. So the template file here can be used to define the basic framework of the application. You can use this file to describe the specific information of the application, for example: labels or annotations of the application, and of course you can directly add components, policies and set workflows in the template file. The type of template file can be YAML (template.yaml) or CUE (template.cue).

Reviewer: Through the above introduction, we know that a very important part of an addon is its resource description files which define the Kubernetes resource objects to be installed.

Reviewer: which will be dispatched to clusters by the KubeVela controller once the addon is enabled.

> Which to choose depends on whether you want to change the application by parameters when the addon is enabled.

Reviewer: Depending on the need of parameterizing the application when enabling the addon, you can select the preferred way to customize your design.

> >Please notice: You can only choose one of `template.cue` or `template.yaml`, otherwise will report an error when enable the addon.

Reviewer: otherwise an error will be reported when enabling the addon.

  name: velaux
  namespace: vela-system
spec:
  components:
    - name: namespace
      type: k8s-objects
      properties:
        objects:
        - apiVersion: v1
          kind: Namespace
          metadata:
            name: my-namespace
```

> In this example, we define the basic framework of an application. This application contains a `k8s-objects` type component that contains `namespace` resource. After the addon is enabled, this namespace will be applied by KubeVela to all clusters.

Reviewer: we define the skeleton of an application.

Reviewer: `k8s-objects` typed component that contains one `namespace` typed resource.

Reviewer: will be applied to all clusters by the KubeVela controller.

#### template.cue

> If you want the end user to determine some fields of the application by setting parameters when enabling the addon, you need write a `template.cue` file to do so. You can define the `template.cue` file like this to allow end-user specify the name of namespace in the above example:

Reviewer: like this -> like the following code

```cue
package main

output: {
	apiVersion: "core.oam.dev/v1beta1"
	kind:       "Application"
	metadata: {
		name:      "example"
		namespace: "vela-system"
	}
	spec: {
		components: [
			{
				type: "k8s-objects"
				name: "example-namespace"
				properties: objects: [{
					apiVersion: "v1"
					kind:       "Namespace"
					metadata: name: parameter.namespace
				}]
			},
		]
	}
}
```

> As we can see, this CUE file mainly contain a `ouput` block. The `output` block must be a KubeVela application that may contain components, policies, or workflow. 

Reviewer: The CUE file shown above contains an `output` field. The `output` field must embeds a standard KubeVela application, consisting components, policies, and workflow.

> Notice: This CUE file must have a `package main` header.

> In this example, we also define a namespace in `k8s-objects` component, and the name of it is set by parameters. If you want the created namespace is `my-namespace` you can execute the command like this:

Reviewer: If you want the created namespace to be `my-namespace`, you can run the following command:

```shell
$ vela addon enable <addon-name> namespace=my-namespace
```

After rendered, the resulting application is:

```yaml
kind: Application
metadata:
  name: example
  namespace: vela-system
spec:
  components:
    - name: namespace
      type: k8s-objects
      properties:
        objects:
          - apiVersion: v1
            kind: Namespace
            metadata:
              name: my-namespace
```

> Please notice: The name of Application in template file will be replaced by the addon name in `metadata.yaml`. The addon application will always have a unified name in the format of `addon-<addon_name>`.

> Although you can define the entire content of the application in the template file, but this may cause the template file to become very large, so you can choose to split a part of some content into the `resources` directory, latter section will introduce the all details.

Reviewer: In case your template file is too large, you can split the entire content of the application into multiple files under the `resources` folder. The following section will discuss it in detail.

##### Auxiliary resources

> You also can define some auxiliary resources that only to applied to control-plane in `outputs` CUE block of `template.cue` file. These resources will applied to control-plane directly. For example:

Reviewer: You can also define some auxiliary resources in the `outputs` field of the `template.cue` file. These resources will only be applied to the control plane.

```cue
package main

output: {
	apiVersion: "core.oam.dev/v1beta1"
	kind:       "Application"
	metadata: {
		name:      "example"
		namespace: "vela-system"
	}
	spec: {
		
	}
	... 
}

outputs: resourceTree: {
	apiVersion: "v1"
	kind:       "ConfigMap"
	metadata: {
		name:      "resource-tree"
		namespace: "vela-system"
		labels: {
			"rules.oam.dev/resources":       "true"
			"rules.oam.dev/resource-format": "json"
		}
	}
	data: rules: json.Marshal(_rules)
}

_rules: {...}
```

In this example, we define a configmap `resourceTree` as an auxiliary resource, this configmap is actually a [resource topology rule](../../reference/topology-rule) that only need to be applied to control-plane.

##### Determine which clusters to be installed by parameters in `template.cue`

> If you want the resources in the addon to be installed not only in the control-plane, but also in various other managed-clusters, and installed clusters need to be specified by the user by setting the `clusters` parameter when enabling the addon. You can do this by adding a topology policy in `template.cue` as shown below:

Reviewer: If you want the resources in the addon to be installed not only in the control-plane, but also in managed clusters,  you can use the `topology` policy in your application as shown below. The `parameter.clusters` field will be filled when the addon is enabled with the `clusters` parameter specified.

```cue
package main

output: {
	apiVersion: "core.oam.dev/v1beta1"
	kind:       "Application"
	metadata: {
		name:      "example"
		namespace: "vela-system"
	}
	spec: {
		components:{...}
		policies: [{
			type: "topology"
			name: "deploy-topology"
			properties: {
				if parameter.clusters != _|_ {
					clusters: parameter.clusters
				}
				if parameter.clusters == _|_ {
					clusterLabelSelector: {}
				}
			}
		}]
	}}
```

If you execute command like below to enable the addon, resources will be deployed to `local` cluster and `cluster1` cluster.

```shell
$ vela addon enable <addon-name> clusters=local,cluser1
```

The render result will be:

```yaml
kind: Application
metadata:
  name: example
  namespace: vela-system
spec:
  components: ...
  policies:
    - type: "topology"
      name: "deploy-topology"
      properties:
        clusters:
          - local
          - cluster1
```

> Since an empty `clusterLabelSelector` topology will choose all exist clusters as target clusters, you can just enable the addon without `clsuters` parameter to install it to all clusters:

Reviewer: without `clusters` parameters

```shell
$ vela addon enable <addon-name>
```

> The render result is :

Reviewer: The rendering result is:

```yaml
kind: Application
metadata:
  name: example
  namespace: vela-system
spec:
  components: ...
  policies:
    - type: "topology"
      name: "deploy-topology"
      properties:
        clusterLabelSelector: {}
```

#### Examples

Here are some existing addons made by community.

* [OCM control plane](https://github.com/kubevela/catalog/blob/master/addons/ocm-hub-control-plane/template.yaml), this addon needn't change any content while enabling, so it chooses to use `template.yaml`.
* [ingress-nginx](https://github.com/kubevela/catalog/tree/master/addons/ingress-nginx) addon is an example define a `template.cue` file, which can change some content of resources.

### parameter.cue (Optional)

> In the example above, we used `parameter.namespace` parameter to set the name of namespace, and the `parameter.clusters` set the clusters that to be installed. We also need a parameter definition file (`parameter.cue`) to define what parameters the addon has. For examples:

Reviewer: we used -> we use

```cue
parameter: {		
  //+usage=clsuters install to
  clsuters: [...string]
  //+usage=namespace to create
  namespace: string
}
```

### `resources/` directory (Optional)

> Except writing every thing about an application in  one `temaplte.cue` or `template.yaml`, you also can split some resource description file to `resources` directory to avoid a very huge template file. File type in this dir can be YAML or CUE.

Reviewer: every thing -> everything
in  one -> in one
some resource description files to the `resources` directly
You can place either YAML files or CUE files in this directory.

#### YAML resources

> The YAML type files must be Kubernetes objects, you can define many objects one by one in a file. It will be directly added to the application as a `K8s-object` type component during rendering. For example:

Reviewer: as a `k8s-objects` typed component

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ServiceAccount
metadata:
  name: my-service-account
  namespace: default
secrets:
- name: my-secret
```

> In this example, we define a service account resource. The render result is :

Reviewer: define a ServiceAccount resource

```yaml
kind: Application
metadata:
  name: example
  namespace: vela-system
spec:
  components:
    -
    #   ...
    #   other contents defined in template file
    #   ...
    - name: namespace
      type: k8s-objects
      components:
        objects:
        -  apiVersion: v1
           kind: ServiceAccount
           metadata:
            name: my-service-account
            namespace: default
            secrets:
            - name: my-secret
```

> An example is [OCM](https://github.com/kubevela/catalog/tree/master/addons/ocm-hub-control-plane). All files in this addon is YAML.

Reviewer: is the OCM addon. All files included in this addon are all YAML typed.

```cue
// template.cue

package main

output: {
	apiVersion: "core.oam.dev/v1beta1"
	kind:       "Application"
	metadata: {
		name:      "example"
		namespace: "vela-system"
	}
	spec: {
		// reference namespace block from resources/naemspace.cue
		components: [namespace]
		// reference topology block from resources/topology.cue
		policies: [topology]
	}
}
```

After enabled with command `$ vela addon enable <addon-name> namespace=my-namespace clusters=local,cluser1`, the resulting application is:

```yaml
apiVersion: core.oam.dev/v1beta1
kind: Application
metadata:
  name: example
  namespace: vela-system
spec:
  components:
    - name: namespace
      type: k8s-objects
      properties:
        objects:
          - apiVersion: v1
            kind: Namespace
            metadata:
              name: my-namespace
  policies:
    - type: "topology"
      name: "deploy-topology"
      properties:
        clusters:
          - local
          - cluster1
```

> Please notice: Only those CUE files with header `package main` can be reference by `template.cue`.

You can refer to the [CUE basic](../cue/basic) to learn language details.

#### Use metadata of context 

> In addition to dynamically rendering the application by parameters, you can also read fields defined in `metadata.yaml` for rendering. For example, you can define a `templatec.cue` file as follows:

Reviewer: you can define a `template.cue` file as follows:

```cue
output: {
	apiVersion: "core.oam.dev/v1beta1"
	kind:       "Application"
	metadata: {
		name:      "example"
		namespace: "vela-system"
	}
	spec: {
		components: [
			{
				type: "webservice"
				properties: {
					image: "oamdev/vela-apiserver:" + context.metadata.version
				}
			},
		]
	}
}

```

When rendering, the fields defined in `metadata.yaml` will be put into the CUE block of `context` and rendered together with other CUE files, if the `metadata.yaml` is:

```yaml
...
name: velaux
version: 1.2.4
...
```

Resulting application is:

```yaml
apiVersion: core.oam.dev/v1beta1
kind:       Application
metadata:
  name: example
  namespace: "vela-system"
spec:
  components:
    - type: webservice
      properties:
        image: "oamdev/vela-apiserver:v1.2.4"
```

> The image tag becomes the addon's version due to the `context.metadata.version` points to. The real example is [VelaUX](https://github.com/kubevela/catalog/blob/master/addons/velaux/resources/apiserver.cue). Other available fields please refer to [metadata](#metadata.yaml(Required)).

Reviewer: Is this anchor working?

> ### `definitions/` directory(Optional)

Reviewer: directory (Optional)

> The `definitions` directory is used to store `X-Definitions`, which can be a YAML file of ComponentDefinition, traitDefinitions or workflowStepDefinitions Kubernetes CR. It can also be a CUE type of  KubeVela [def](../../getting-started/definition), which will be rendered into the corresponding X-definitions CR when enabled and applied to the cluster.

Reviewer: TraitDefintions or WorkflowStepDefinitions

Reviewer: It can also be a CUE file that defines KubeVela Definitions

> > Please notice: These definitions only will be applied to control-plane

Reviewer: will only be applied to the control plane
